Add EIP: Upgrade block proposer election to Whisk (#7441)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7441.md

---
eip: 7441

> title: Upgrade block proposer election to Whisk SSLE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Upgrade block proposer election to Whisk
```
Suggestion to fit 44 character limit

description: Allow elected block proposers to remain private until block publishing, to prevent DoS attacks
author: George Kadianakis (@asn-d6), Justin Drake (@JustinDrake), dapplion (@dapplion)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7441-upgrade-block-proposer-election-to-whisk-ssle/15316
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-09-01
---

## Abstract

> Upgrades the block proposer election mechanism to Whisk, a single secret leader election (SSLE) protocol. Currently, block proposers are publicly known in advance, sufficiently to allow sequential DoS attacks that could disable Ethereum. This upgrade makes the next block proposer unknown until its block is published.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upgrades the block proposer election mechanism to Whisk - a single secret leader election (SSLE) protocol. Currently block proposers are publicly known in advance sufficiently to allow sequential DoS attacks that could halt the Ethereum blockchain. This upgrade makes the next block proposer unknown until the current block is published.
```

Reviewer 2: yea it was correct. `compromise Ethereum's liveness` sounds great. updated the recommend. also would it be correct to replace `its block` with `the block` then? `its` sounds a bit confusing as to what it refers to

Author: So the meaning is that a proposer is only revealed when specifically the block it is proposing is revealed, and not any other. The word "its" implied that relationship between what block carries the reveal, just "the block" does not specify which block.

Reviewer 2: aha this makes sense. could we change it to `This upgrade allows the next block proposer to stay secret and hidden until its block is published.` 

else current could also work but will provide less context to someone starting from zero background.

## Motivation

The beacon chain currently elects the next 32 block proposers at the beginning of each epoch. The results of this election are public and everyone gets to learn the identity of those future block proposers.

> This information leak enables attackers to launch DoS attacks against each proposer sequentially in an attempt to disable Ethereum.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This information leak enables attackers to launch DoS attacks against each proposer sequentially in an attempt to disable or halt Ethereum blockchain. Further it also allows collusion between block proposers and/or users.
```

there was an EIP which described how proposers and/or users can collude to avoid paying higher base fee and pocket more tips leading to irregular block size, will see which was that . this EIP can potentially address that scenario as well

Author: With whisk, each proposer is aware of its future proposer slots much more in advance. So if there's collusion and proposers want to reveal such information to selected parties, Whisk makes the attack you describe easier.

Reviewer 2: may be then we can add this in security considerations :)

Author: I don't think it's a significant change into the status quo security in this regard. With RANDAO based shuffling actors can still collude if they have proposer slots in a row

## Specification

> 

Reviewer 2: a `Parameters` section can be added to refer to constants relevant to describe the EIP for e.g. `WHISK_EPOCHS_PER_SHUFFLING_PHASE`

Reviewer 2: a `<!-- TODO: add parameters. -->` kind of a TODO can be added which the bots can track post drafts so that the draft acceptance can become less burdensome

Author: If we can avoid having to list of constants that would be better, it would duplicate a lot of content from the specs

Reviewer 2: i guess it makes sense , resolving this comment

### Execution layer

This requires no changes to the Execution Layer.

### Consensus layer

The protocol can be summarized in the following concurrent steps:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Proposals are now divided into shuffling phases of `WHISK_EPOCHS_PER_SHUFFLING_PHASE` epochs
```

Author: I'm not sure if this sentence is necessary. TBH this mini summary of the protocol is not necessary either. It does not provide any specification and is only a general overview for readers. Should it be removed altogether?

Reviewer 2: so the flow of someone looking into this feature would be (or atleast how we want it to be) : Read EIP => Read consensus specs => get into client implementations if someone wants to follow through on this. So mini summary helps making that jump

keeping that in mind, what kind of mini summary would you deem good to fit here. else if we have that somewhere in consensus specs (`fork.md`?) then we can refer it here i guess

Author: I don't think such summary would fit anywhere in the specs. Since it's derived information it mostly fits here or in a blog / etheresearch post introduction.

> - Validators register a tracker on their first proposal after the fork

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Validators register a unique tracker on their first proposal after the fork
```

- At the start of a shuffling phase a list of candidate trackers is selected using public randomness from RANDAO

> - During one shuffling phase each proposer shuffles a subset of the candidate trackers using private randomness

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- During a shuffling phase each proposer shuffles a subset of the candidate trackers using private randomness
```

> - After one shuffling phase an ordered list of proposer trackers is selected from the candidate set using RANDAO

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- After each shuffling phase an ordered list of proposer trackers is selected from the candidate set using RANDAO
```

The full specification of the proposed change can be found in [`/_features/whisk/beacon-chain.md`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/a39abe388bc2d1abd5b4fd62fd18aed497956b30/specs/_features/whisk/beacon-chain.md). In summary:

> - Update `BeaconState` with fields needed to track validator trackers, commitments, and the two rounds of candidate election.

Reviewer 2: may be we don't need this detail as its defined in the `full specification` already refered and could do away with this

Author: Would be good define some guidelines on what this section is expected to include or not? Other editors can chip-in and @djrtwo

- Add `select_whisk_candidate_trackers` to compute the next vector of candidates from the validator set.
- Add `select_whisk_proposer_trackers` to compute the next vector of proposers from current candidates.
- Add `process_whisk_updates` to epoch processing logic.
- Add `process_whisk_opening_proof` to validate block proposer has knowledge of this slot's elected tracker.
- Modify `process_block_header` to not assert proposer election with `get_beacon_proposer_index`, instead assert valid opening proof.
- Update `BeaconBlockBody` with fields to submit opening proof, shuffled trackers with proof, and tracker registration with proof.
- Add `get_shuffle_indices` to compute pre-shuffle candidate selection
- Add `process_shuffled_trackers` to submit shuffled candidate trackers.
- Add `process_whisk` to block processing logic.
- Modify `apply_deposit` to register an initial unique tracker and commitment without entropy.

## Rationale

### Fields per validator

> Whisk requires appending one tracker `(rG,krG)` and one commitment `kG` per validator. Both are updated at max once through a validator's lifetime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whisk requires having one unique tracker `(rG,krG)` and one commitment `kG` per validator. Both are updated at max once through a validator's lifetime whenever the validator gets to propose first block after the fork.
```

Trackers are registered with a randomized base `(rG,krG)` to make it harder for adversaries to track them through shuffling gates. It can become an issue if the set of honest shufflers is small.

### Identity binding

Each tracker must be bound to a validator's identity to prevent multiple parties to claim the same proposer slot. Otherwise, it would allow proposers to sell their proposer slot, and cause fork-choice issues if two competing blocks appear.

Whisk does identity binding by storing a commitment to the tracker's secret `kG` in the validator record. Storing the commitment also ensures the uniqueness of `k`.

Alternatively, identity binding can be achieved by forcing the hash prefix of `hash(kG)` to match its validator index. However, validators would have to brute force `k` making bootstrap of the system harder for participants with fewer computational resources.

Identity binding can also be achieved by setting `k = hash(nonce + pubkey)`. However, proposers will need to reveal `k` and be de-anonymized for repeated proposals on adjacent shuffling phases.

### Alternative: non-single secret election

> Secret non-single leader election is based on protocol engineering rather than cryptography, thus much simpler and cheap than Whisk. However, it complicates the fork-choice and opens it up to potential MEV time-buying attacks, making it an unsuitable option at the time of writing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secret non-single leader election could be based on protocol engineering rather than cryptography, thus much simpler and cheaper than Whisk. However, it complicates the fork-choice and opens it to potential MEV time-buying attacks, making it an unsuitable option at the time of writing.
```

### Alternative: network anonymity

Privacy-preserving networking protocols like Dandelion or Dandelion++ increase the privacy of network participants but not sufficiently for Ethereum's use case.

SASSAFRAS is a simpler alternative SSLE protocol consensus-wise, but it relies on a network anonymity layer. Its specific trade-offs do not fit Ethereum's overall threat model better than Whisk.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP introduces backward incompatible changes to the block validation rule set on the consensus layer and must be accompanied by a hard fork.

PBS participants (e.g. builders) will not know the next proposer validator index to use a specific pre-registered fee recipient; unless the proposer chooses to reveal itself ahead of time. Block explorers and tooling will not be able to attribute missing slots to a specific validator index.

## Security Considerations

The shuffling strategy is analyzed in a companion paper and considered sufficiently safe for Whisk's use case. The data and computational complexity of this EIP are significant but constant, thus does not open new DoS vectors. 

### Anonymity set

> The anonymity set in Whisk equals `WHISK_CANDIDATE_TRACKERS_COUNT - WHISK_PROPOSER_TRACKERS_COUNT` (8,192) which are the candidates that did not get selected as proposers. That count of validators corresponds to a smaller number of p2p nodes. Assuming a Pareto principle where "20% of the nodes run 80% of the validators" the anonymity corresponds to 2,108 nodes on average. A bigger candidate pool could make the shuffling strategy unsafe while shuffling more trackers per round would increase the cost of the ZK proofs.

Author: I had a version of the EIP defining all constants in this document, but there are so many, see https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/_features/whisk/beacon-chain.md#constants

Should this be expressed in words to decouple it from those specific constants?

> The anonymity set in Whisk equals `WHISK_CANDIDATE_TRACKERS_COUNT - WHISK_PROPOSER_TRACKERS_COUNT` (8,192) which are the candidates that did not get selected as proposers. That count of validators corresponds to a smaller number of p2p nodes. Assuming a Pareto principle where "20% of the nodes run 80% of the validators" the anonymity corresponds to 2,108 nodes on average. A bigger candidate pool could make the shuffling strategy unsafe while shuffling more trackers per round would increase the cost of the ZK proofs.

Reviewer 2: no this is good for a person reading EIP to make easy transition to the specs... resolving the comment
